Congratulations, Joe.
Joe Finder.
You changed publishing houses, by the way, with Viking to Valentine's.
Right.
That was a... It was actually not a... It wasn't a traumatic thing.
I only had a one-book contract with Viking, and so my agent gave it to Viking, and they offered good money, actually more than the Moscow Club, and
Then there was an auction.
Putnam and Ballantyne and Viking were all involved.
So Linda Gray had just moved to Ballantyne from Bantam.
Really was hot for the book.
So she paid a lot.
But I miss Viking, I have to say, honestly.
I like them a lot.
Tell me a bit about, I mean, I know your background, but your background is so, it's not unsuited for the, certainly for the subject that you bring to this, but the fact that you're writing thrillers now, classy, nice, nicely written thriller.
But you're a thriller writer now.
That's right.
This is your profession.
Yeah.
You're not teaching anymore, are you?
I have not taught since 89.
And I love what I'm doing.
And what do you want me to tell you about your background?
Well, tell me about your background.
I know I've got it in the previous story.
I have to move on to find it.
But tell me about it.
Oh, sure.
Okay.
I grew up, first of all, briefly, in Afghanistan and the Philippines.
We traveled a lot in my childhood.
And I was a Russian studies major at Yale.
and went right to graduate school at Harvard, to the Russian Research Center, to study Soviet politics and foreign policy.
And I took a leave after the first year to write Red Carpet, this nonfiction book that no one read.
It was published on the list.
It was published.
It sold 13,000 copies.
Nothing wrong with that.
And it was, you know, I was 24 years old when it was published, and it was a... That's extraordinary.
Yeah, and it was, in a sense, I think it was... I'm happy with the book, but you know how it is.
You can always do better.
What year was this?
83.
And what I do know is that I was pretty young to do it.
I was pretty too young to actually go through the publishing experience, because this was really tough.
Libel threat from Dr. Armand Hammer.
Mm-hmm.
I remember that.
He had Louis Neisser publish an op-ed piece in the New York Times threatening me in veiled terms.
In print?
In print.
He threatened my publisher.
What was the bone of contention?
Well, this was the first book that had been done about, this was the first book on Armand Hammer that he had not commissioned or written himself.
Had he read any of it, or is this just here?
Yeah, yeah.
Well, I had done an investigative take on him, and I found a lot of very interesting things about Hammer, and things that he wanted to keep concealed, a lot of stuff.
And I laid it right out, and every word in that book is true.
Everything is documented.
Well, there were no lawsuits, were there?
There were no lawsuits, but the most powerful thing you can do is threaten a lawsuit.
If you're a rich, powerful guy like Hammer, you threaten them.
Well, you know, I think it's a good thing.
It's a good thing.
And so after I published Red Carpet, I started writing for other newspapers, magazine, Wall Street Journal, New Republic, places like that.
And I really couldn't make it freelance and started teaching writing at Harvard.
I taught there for five years.
And I really taught there until, I think, the program began to fall apart.
You might have heard stories.
No, I haven't.
That's a whole separate subject.
Expository writing, they forced the head out, forced Richard Marius out.
He's gone?
He's gone.
Yeah.
In confidence.
Since when?
Since January, I guess.
Is there an expository writing program still?
Yes, there is.
But he's not the head of the name.
Who took it?
Well, they're looking for a director right now.
They're probably going to give it to the associate director.
But the place is in chaos.
I'm sorry to hear that, because I know Marius is a nice guy.
Obviously, I don't know him that well, because this is news to me.
Yeah, yeah.
But also in 89, I sold the Moscow Club, and I had sort of given myself a couple of years.
Got it in 89?
Oh, you sold it in 89.
I sold it in 89.
And they sold it to eventually 30 countries, and so I was able to, and that was good money, and I was able to quit Harvard and start off on my own.
and writing full-time.
So I've been writing full-time since 1989.
That's wonderful.
But for me, if you ask, is there anything sort of discordant about my background, don't forget, I do nonfiction.
I do sort of serious nonfiction as well as entertainment.
And you continue to do this series now?
Oh, absolutely.
You did have a piece in the New York Times about, I don't know, a year or so ago.
I write, yeah, I review for them pretty regularly.
Whenever there's a book on espionage or intelligence or Russia,
that sort of thing.
I've reviewed for them, including a couple of, at least one cover review, one semi-cover review.
I remember the cover review.
So I sort of keep my hand in, partly because I love writing nonfiction, but also partly because it sort of bolsters my fiction.
It's synergy, one reinforces the other.
Well, it gives you a credibility, too.
Well, that, too.
I can't deny that.
I assume it also gives you access to sources.
Absolutely.
I mean, you thank sources here.
It seems to me that they were very helpful.
Authenticity, clearly, is a very important issue.
Yeah, and I've got friends in CIA and FBI and...
other intelligence agencies and the government and private sector.
All that stuff really makes a difference when you're writing a book, I think.
And so basically I get to write serious, there's this sort of graduate student academic, call it the academic side of me, which writes nonfiction pieces for the New Republic, Times Literary Supplement, New York Times Book Review,
And then there's the other part of me, which is the entertainer, which sort of feeds on that underpinning, in a sense.
Did you know you had this knack for storytelling in there?
Yeah, I did, but I was scared to make the leap for a long time.
I like this just as much, if not better.
Thank you.
I like this a lot better.
The writing's a lot better.
I think maybe you did one or two more drafts here.
Maybe I'm wrong.
I don't know.
Not true, but I grew as a writer.
Well, that's what I see.
And you write in a word processor?
Yeah, I do.
I can sense that for some reason.
There are things that you see in the editing.
Go ahead.
Bob Parker just started writing with a word processor.
I saw it.
He said he'd never give up the old typewriter.
You think it's better for writing or worse?
I think it's better.
I think it is, too.
But, you know, what I have to do... I don't know exactly what you're saying.
No, no, no.
The number two pencil is sacred, but no, I think it's better.
No, what I do is I print out, I do hard copy, as they call it, print it out, and I edit with a pencil.
So I really believe that you have to edit it by looking at the hard copy and not looking at it on the screen.
There was a study at MIT about this that
that indicates that there's a difference between the transmitted image, i.e., the PC, and the reflected image, which is what we see on the page.
And at the reflected image, we perceive it differently.
There's no question about it.
I don't have to be part of a study to validate it for you.
I mean, I've been writing for print for 20 years, and I have to see it in hard copy.
And it looks different.
It sounds different.
You see mistakes.
My columns now that I'm sending my modem, I was telling my wife, I said,
It's possible to do this and never see it on paper until it's printed.
Right.
But I print it out.
I have to, because then I start to see the way it's going to look at type.
Yeah.
And quotes look different.
Absolutely.
What people say looks different.
Yeah.
And they'll say, I say that.
I've got tape now.
I say no shit.
You didn't say that.
Yeah.
But maybe you didn't think it would look like that.
Right.
No, so I print out.
But with this book.
Yeah, it does.
I really sort of let myself go.
You see, Moscow Club was my first book, and I like it a lot and all that, but it was my apprentice effort in a lot of ways.
However, you did gain a certain cachet by having, in a way, predicted the demise of the Soviet Union, and that is something that you kind of have to live up to, isn't it?
Yeah.
I'm sure people are looking at this and saying, well, is this really what's going on?
I don't know if you finished the book, but I don't want to wreck this book.
No, don't.
I haven't finished it.
But I will say this much.
I think I will not wreck it for you, but the resolution of this book, the whole plot centers on the revelation that there is a high-level KGB mole in the CIA after the Cold War is over.
I can use that in print, then, you think?
Yes.
Yeah, that's okay.
And the timing for the Ames thing could not be better because the Ames case broke.
We may even have our lead here.
Yeah, yeah.
The week this book shipped, the Ames case broke.
It's amazing, isn't it?
Yeah.
In fact, there are a lot of... It's totally coincidental.
I mean, I didn't have any inside knowledge when I was writing this book.
But the character... Oh, boy.
Well, these maverick killers, though, that's... Well, yeah.
One second.
But the...
The mole in my book turns out to be in CIA.
Well, don't tell me who it is.
I'm afraid to.
All right.
It's very similar to Ames.
It's true.
The population is very similar.
That's all I'll say.
I'll handle it properly.
I'm not writing this for next week, by the way.
Ethan's next week.
You're the week after.
It's better because I'll have another newspaper online by then.
Right, right.
And, yeah, the maverick, you know, the Stassi,
killers and that sort of thing.
This is, you know, the telepathy angle is one thing which I want to talk about, but there are a number of absolute factual underpinnings.
I wish you would talk about that.
Yeah.
The Stassi sort of freelancers, this is now a matter of documented fact.
The CIA has realized that there are really thousands and thousands of
operatives, field agents from the old Soviet bloc who were suddenly unemployed.
Well, I love the epigraph.
It's true.
Is that an actual... Absolutely.
Isn't that amazing?
It's wonderful.
So a lot of these people have their... Some of these guys are working for the Russians.
Some of them are working for... Soldiers of Fortune.
Soldiers of Fortune.
They're working for private industry.
So that's a matter of fact.
The thing about the Russian gold...
It's a matter of fact that the Soviet gold reserves now have dropped from $50 billion to a few billion.
They estimate that $50 billion in Soviet gold was siphoned out of the Soviet Treasury right before the coup, as a matter of fact.
And so I heard that, and I said, oh, thank you.
Was that the premise then?
I mean, was that what gave you the what?
Yeah.
I said, what?
I said, what a great notion for a story.
You're getting this information then that more or less inspired.
This book, did the writing start after the collapse of the Soviet Union?
Yes.
In fact, I started, I haven't actually said this anywhere else, but there's nothing wrong with it.
I started a book and scrapped it.
The guy upstairs, the reason he wrote these short stories, he hit the wall in his novel.
Right, right.
I went back to writing what I know how to do, which is a short story.
Yeah.
Well, I started writing, after I finished Moscow, I started writing.
I went, Michelle and I went to Moscow, and I established connections there with a guy in the black market there.
And I started working on a novel, and I did a lot of research for it.
And then, and my central character was in the KGB, was a hero.
And I really liked this book a lot.
And then the country collapsed, and I said, I'm not getting into this situation.
This is too much mess.
I put it aside.
I'm not throwing it away.
Someday I might use it in some form or another.
The characters might be good.
The characters, the situation.
Maybe it'll be part of a flashback.
Maybe it'll be part of a novel.
I don't know how.
So I started writing this one after the collapse of Russia when I thought, you know.
I truly respect you.
much more for having the wisdom to say, hey, this ain't going to go anywhere.
I mean, Justin Kaplan quit on things.
He really didn't want to quit on, was it, Grant?
Yeah.
But Feeley's book is out there, and it's wonderful.
That's right.
What am I going to do?
David McCullough was doing Picasso.
He says, I hated Picasso.
The more I learned about him, the more I disliked him.
And I said, no, I'm quitting.
That's it.
Going to Eric Truman is what he did.
Good decision.
Yeah, and it's tough to do.
It's really tough to sort of discard something you've been really pouring your heart and soul into.
I think it's a mark of a professional, really.
I think it indicates your growth as a writer.
Yeah.
Don't be embarrassed by admitting to that.
Yeah, but I'm glad I did.
And this sort of sprung, you know, certainly power sprung from a what-if that is, the question really was, so if the Cold War's over, what happens to all the spies?
Of course, you read Le Carre's recently.
I sure did and liked it a lot.
I think it's better than several of his recent books.
I think it's best in the last three or four.
Yes, yes.
It's really written.
Wonderful.
I remember talking to friends in the agency and other places and realizing that the Cold War is over, but the spies are not out of work, that they're going to have to justify their own work.
They're going to have to make trouble.
The spying continues, as we've seen.
So I sort of started with that premise.
And one of the... And I started digging into research into CIA, and I found this mention of a CIA project in telepathy.
Which is the person I didn't believe.
Oh, wow.
So you actually got this from the factual basis?
Absolutely.
There is...
Whenever I mention another study in this book that is documented fact, and... Well, that's cool.
Yeah, let me show you a couple things quickly.
Well, you're getting some pretty heady reviews, Joe, I have to say.
I mean, you're the successor to Ludlum, I think.
That was The Globe.
I started two places.
There was another one out of Chicago.
Yeah.
I don't know, but I know Greek name when I say it.
Yeah, yeah.
I brought this just for you.
Don't forget it.
I'd like to have it.
Anything will help.
In fact, you might mail some stuff.
Yes, I could.
You don't have a fax, right?
I do.
You do?
Just my phone number.
Tell me you're calling.
You put the fax on.
Okay, yeah.
When I have two more newspapers, I want to get my own facts.
Yeah, you should.
It's worth it.
I agree.
Especially for the motive, I think.
Yeah, definitely.
So that's one of the things I started to look into.
I was really intrigued by it, and it turned out the more I did research that the KGB had a similar program.
These are really kept very, these are buried, partly out of fear of ridicule, partly because it sort of strains credulity in a lot of ways.
But as I mentioned in this book, the Defense Department has, I believe in it myself too.
I've got a personal experience, I'll tell you how to do that.
I want to hear about that.
I've had, I mean, there have been friends of mine, academics particularly, who said,
ESP.
You can't be serious.
And the truth is, it was sort of ballsy, pardon me, but I said, I believe in it, and I've read enough about it, but I believe this could happen.
Impertinent?
Can we put in that word instead of ballsy?
Yeah.
I can't use ballsy for my clients.
Yeah, no, you can't.
It's called risky, in a sense, all right?
I do believe in it.
And when I saw that the Pentagon, the Department of Defense, has psychics on their payroll, and they used them to find a general dozier in Italy when he was kidnapped by the Red Brigades, a number of cases which are all in there, I said, well, okay, maybe Cambridge doesn't believe in it.
But I do believe.
And the Defense Department does, and the Russian KGB, and the East Germans do.
There are some people who have this ability.
And I talked to a couple of friends of mine who are neurologists and neurobiologists, and I said, if it's possible that we can hear other people's thoughts in any way, where would this be?
And they told me there's a speech center in the brain, which is basically where thoughts are downloaded before we speak.
We're about to form words.
Yeah.
And then, you know, by the way, there was a front page story in the Globe a few months ago, right after I'd finished writing the book.
It really is risky for a fiction writer.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
I'm trying to interrupt.
Yeah.
There's a front page story in the Globe.
Cornell researcher finds evidence for an ESP.
Well, you know, okay, people buy Anne Rice and they believe in witches and vampires.
Okay.
This is something that I really think is plausible.
And in any case, I thought this would be very entertaining.
And as long as I have as much underpinning of fact around it, there'll be the suspension of disbelief.
You know, Jurassic Park comes out of actual DNA fossil research.
You know, that is what emboldened me, I have to say.
When I read Jurassic Park, I said, you know, dinosaurs do not live
And so far, we cannot clone them.
But it is a possibility.
And Crichton did all the up-to-date research and found out that it was brilliant.
He was brilliant.
And I said, I was so blown away by Jurassic Park, and I realized, I think that this is something that could happen in the near future as well.
They did something not unlike it shortly thereafter.
Right.
Nothing as dramatic as a dinosaur, but they did.
No, but they got the amber.
Yeah, there was a clone of something.
I mean, they did something.
That's right.
So it really was Jurassic Park, but that's what it was.
All you need is that premise.
That's the actual premise.
Right.
And again, it was risky, but I have to say, you know, I sort of, this is corny, but I clipped out a quotation from Herodotus that I put up ironically that said, what is it, great deeds are wrought at great risks.
Now, understand, I meant this with irony, but nonetheless I thought, you know, if you're going to do something, if you're going to really go out on a limb, go out on a limb, you know?
That's right.
Right?
So, and the other risk I took with this book is writing this in the first person.
You do not do this in thrillers.
Interesting.
It's highly unusual.
You know, I hadn't... If you look around, if you look at your shelf, whatever... It seems right to me.
Yeah.
Why is that?
Because very often the only character might be blown away, too.
Yeah.
Fundamentally, you lose a threat.
You lose the feeling that the person— But you came up with a very interesting device.
Yeah.
Well, it's a frame.
It's something that Michelle helped me with, actually.
Michelle's specialty is 19th-century fiction.
I mean, Margaret Atwood did the same thing with Handmaiden's Tale.
They find the manuscript.
Right.
It's the old 19th century frame.
And I use that framing device to say that this would sort of make it, in a sense, more involving and scarier to realize that what you are reading is an actual manuscript that has been, you know, sent by a dead man.
And throughout the book you get me wondering how was he killed and why.
And that, you know, that tweaked attention as far as I was concerned.
But writing in the book, I loved the first person.
I loved it.
And there's riskiness to, it's kind of a downer at the beginning.
And again, I abused the book, but you know, you get to like the character.
And you don't want him to die.
But he's dead.
He doesn't want him to be dead.
I don't want him to be dead.
Maybe there's a trick here.
Maybe he's not dead.
Maybe there is.
Maybe there isn't.
Right.
But my agent and my editor both were very nervous about first person.
And they said, readers don't really buy first-person narratives.
I couldn't disagree more.
Me too.
I think the first person is appealing as hell.
I see some structural problems with it, because you really have to have it entirely from the point of view of the narrator.
That's the major problem.
You cannot get any third-person perspective.
You can't go over there to get that.
You don't see the bad guys in the bushes.
You don't see that.
But the immediacy, and this is the way it happens.
Yeah.
It's so enrapturing.
It's not a word, but so appealing.
I loved it.
And also, the other sort of risk I think I took is not allowing myself to be straight-jacketed by the conventions of the genre.
In other words, there are
You know, there has to be a bad guy and a good guy.
Certain things have to happen.
No sense of humor, all that sort of thing, right?
It'd be deadly earnest.
Well, as you see, you know, my character, the narrative voice, makes jokes and witticisms.
And perhaps he's a little too intellectual, you know, for a CIA agent.
Well, yeah, but he's kind of a maverick, too.
Yeah, he's a maverick.
He left at a young age.
Yeah, yeah.
He had problems with it.
Right, right.
He's different.
Right.
And so, you know, there's stuff in there in Boston in which I sort of make fun of certain restaurants and that sort of thing, you know.
On the Wall Street without any bars.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And there's stuff in there which I really enjoyed writing.
And it sounds immodest.
I know it'll sound immodest.
I'd pick this book up, and I'll look through it, and I'll really take pleasure out of reading the passage.
That's nice.
Now, this is not literature, obviously.
This is entertainment.
This is like, you know, I hope this is as effective as, you know, No Way Out or, you know, a movie like that.
But I really enjoyed writing it.
Like a movie like that?
I mean, is there a subtext to that?
Do you have any sold options on this at all?
This week...
Yeah, we had several offers, and we were just about to sign a deal, make a deal.
It's very exciting.
But I'll tell you this off the record, because it's not a thing I'll say.
But I can say on the record that we're on the verge of signing a movie deal, and it's a major star.
You should get a deal as consultant to this thing, too.
I'd like to, yeah.
And I'd like to be involved.
I don't want to be...
I do believe that movies are a very different language from books.
Well, they are, by definition, collaborative efforts.
That's right.
And, you know, you take someone like Tom Clancy, who... Take him, please.
Yeah, who went out, you know, and started lambasting Patriot Games, which, number one, is better than the book.
Oh, I see.
Right?
And number two was an excellent movie, I thought.
Yeah, his writing has become maddening.
Off the record, he's a shitty writer.
No, it's okay.
That's fine, but I will tell you.
No, we're not.
Oh, we are?
Okay, sorry.
Red light is on the way out.
Yeah.
No, he, at Random House, they never edited him at all.
And he just moved to Bantam.
You know, nobody edits Stephen King.
They're scared.
Right.
Nobody edits Clancy.
They're scared.
I guess what they're thinking is it doesn't make a damn bit of difference.
People are going to buy the next Ludlam or Clancy or King.
No, but these guys have egos.
Tom Clancy.
Right.
Stephen King brought out his first novel in the unexpercated Ludlam.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Endless.
I've never read any of that.
Yeah, you're not going to see the unabridged Moscow Club or the unabridged Stuart Harry Powers.
I love that.
The editors...
if you have a great editor it makes all the difference and you know i have i already have two editors before i've been given to my publishing house michelle and my brother henry two terrific editors you mentioned that here yeah i mean you know and my agent who actually is an editor i mean my agent's wife is a first have you read the book how we die you know the book i've heard about him i haven't read it it's labor intensive a really terrible thing well ethan says that glenn came to him first the idea
I mean, I don't know.
I don't know.
Forget about writing about it.
Go ahead.
Don't worry.
Yeah, and my brother had him.
Let's see.
What else?
We talked about the gold.
We talked about the ESP.
You did tell me about the ESP.
Let me ask you a question.
Do you know Walter Forteimer?
Is that his library?
Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh.
You know, I mean, Edmund Moore's library that you have?
Or is that just something you... It's based on Walter Ford Simon.
Because he's in my book.
Yeah.
I went to his house at the Watergate.
And the collection is very similar to his.
But I'd heard about that.
So yeah, he's sort of based on the concept of Ford Simon.
Yeah, and that's not a question.
Yeah, and there are characters in my book, no question, who are based on...
cia officials i know retired cia officials i know in particular absolutely you you do mention using your it isn't often in a work of fiction that you that you acknowledge the uh the help of you know professional intelligence people yeah and you do maintain this network of context
Oh, it's very important.
It's very important for plausibility and for when I want to do research, you know, and I do a lot of research.
And also just in terms of the gestalt, you know, I need to know what they're feeling.
That's why I'm portraying a CIA in this book post-Cold War, where there's sort of a scared...
anxious feeling, now what?
What do we do?
What's the purpose?
What's the mission of the CIA?
And I was hearing this sort of angst from a number of CIA people I talked to.
I remember when you and I sat, and I think we even did that interview here, and you were actually predicting the demise of the Soviet Union.
So this was no fluke in the last book, wasn't it?
You saw something there that...
it's not clairvoyance.
It really is, you know, if you study this stuff closely, this is, you know, this is the advantage to actually having a nonfiction expertise, where instead of, I think a lot of thriller writers pick up their ideas from the headlines and just run with it.
But in fact, if you have access to intelligent sources and you sort of have your ear to the ground, you do hear things.
And
I heard about this gold before it was in the press.
I heard about the Ames case almost a year ago.
So they've been working on it for quite a while.
They've been working on it for about two years.
You heard Ames didn't hear about it?
You heard about Ames didn't hear about it?
Well, I didn't have a name.
I didn't have a position.
Bad trade craft.
And the book I'm working on now, which
sort of centers on an event that will happen.
All this stuff you get from maintaining the sources.
And there is a sort of trade-off, because you cannot abuse CIA if you want to maintain relations.
Give me a current quote on Ames.
I mean, what do your people tell you?
I mean, is it as bad as they say?
Well, first of all, there is...
I heard this several months ago that there are two highly placed moles.
This isn't the end of it.
This is not the end.
Because they've been looking for the moles since Angleton.
Yeah, but you know, Angleton died in 75.
Excuse me, was fired in 75.
And it wasn't until 85 that Ames started to work.
So Angleton really was...
Semi-runatic.
Hunting phantoms, right?
I think so, yeah.
And he sabotaged the CIA in many ways.
And in fact, it really is a reaction to Angleton that made the CIA so lax.
The Angleton era was like their McCarthyism.
And there's such a fear of going back to that paralyzing era.
Yeah, this guy slipped through the cracks.
The Office of Security at the CIA is inept.
Their polygraph examiners only do it occasionally.
He passed the test, apparently.
He was boxed, as they call it in the agency, twice.
And he passed the test.
But if you know how to beat the test, there are ways to do it.
And if you're examined by someone who's not a good examiner, it doesn't make any difference.
It's easy to pass it.
and plus he was an old boy and they probably his name was aldrich ames like somebody said his last name is right reversible right right i can't believe this um so that's you know we have a fascination for this stuff yeah yeah and the other thing is the fbi and the cia did not work together until recently yeah there's such rivalry that if they'd cross-checked
their own reports.
I was trying to read a book yesterday, lately, not yesterday, but recently, from Holt.
I couldn't finish it.
You know what I mean?
Last Train from Germany or something.
Oh, Noah Highland.
Do you know the book?
Oh, is it Tyler?
Tyler.
Yeah, W.T.
Couldn't finish it.
What's it about?
Again, it's a post.
It's a guy.
If the CIA leaves, they can't find him.
And it would be perfect for him.
But it's just...
It doesn't grab you.
It doesn't grab me.
My wife could figure me, what are you doing with this book?
I said, I'm going to give it one more day.
You know, if you can't do it, you can't do it.
All of a sudden, you're right.
This is what I've never understood.
Why do people write entertainment that is not entertaining?
It has to entertain you.
Absolutely.
Now, do you surprise yourself where you're going, or are you pretty fairly well-plotted?
I don't believe in letting the story get out of control.
There are writers who say,
Wherever the muse takes me, that's where I'm going.
But I believe in knowing the last scene.
I always know the last scene.
And the last scene of this book, I really loved writing.
You'll see, it's very exciting.
I'll probably finish it tonight or tomorrow.
I have to know where it's ending.
I don't always know how it's going to get there.
But that's fun.
That's what's fun, because it's too... I have tried to write things that are too rigidly outlined and plotted out, and it's no fun.
You sort of feel like a machine.
So I'll have notes.
I'll say, in this chapter, Ben goes to see Edmund Moore.
I'll say, you know, talk about the libraries and the CIA old boy, and he learns X. And then the scene is mine to create.
You know?
Ford Zimmer, by the way, claimed in this interview with me that the six days of Bacondo, which was based on his character, based on him.
Interesting.
You have a guy who reads.
Yeah.
he was the cia like he was the curator he built a library over there and he built his own library yeah and uh i bet if you asked him at the time when you know when the book of the movie came out he denied anything interesting house dog he had something about that yeah it's it's clear that germany is is the major power is going to become you know there as a unit as their problems of unification worked out uh a a major
political forces, and that there really is going to be some realignment in Europe.
Russia is weak.
Germany is strong.
There is an absolute resurgence in neo-Nazism.
But you also predict a major depression, a recession in Germany.
Yes.
Which would lead... Is there something that you divide, or is there something that's just here for dramatic purposes?
I sort of think it's possible that
I mean, the weight of the East.
Yes.
Can well collapse, and when it does collapse, it's at that point that all the dissatisfaction finds the expression in the form of neo-Nazism and sort of this statism.
The weight is in Russia, too, for example.
I'll predict right now Yeltsin will be out within two years.
I really think so.
Replaced by what kind of a prison?
not necessarily Geronofsky, but maybe with Skoy, or maybe one of these quote-unquote right-wing neo-fascists.
And that is the right-wing in Russia.
We used to think that the reactionaries are communists, are hard-line communists.
That's not so?
It doesn't make any sense to apply that to Russia, really.
But based on our notion of fascism,
versus communism.
Now the left is the left and the right is the left.
It's very confusing.
But basically I think that we're going to see a strongly nationalistic drive for great power to restore the greatness of Russia.
And they really don't have a democratic tradition.
They don't.
And the majority do not want democracy.
They've never had it.
Right.
It's not in their blood, everything.
Yeah.
I don't know why we assume that democracy is the only way to go.
It didn't work in Africa for the most part.
Yeah, yeah.
You know, we all try to set up these little Americas with these constitutions everywhere we go.
It doesn't work, does it?
No.
Look in Japan.
Right.
If you look at Korea or Taiwan or a number of countries, you're not going to see standard democracy.
No.
It's still very much in a great state of flux.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, Russia's a mess.
But you don't want to get into the prediction business, either.
I just did.
Well, you did, I guess, actually.
Why don't you restate your prediction, then?
I predict that within two years Yeltsin will be out and his government will be replaced legally.
I mean, you know,
Judicially, legislatively.
Same way Hitler took over.
Right.
By a dictatorial oligarchy or straight-on dictator who will rally the people around the restoration of Russia as a great power, Russia versus its surrounding former republics.
as a threat, the U.S.
as a threat, NATO as a threat, et cetera.
This idea of the outside world being a threat to us is very powerful in terms of obtaining cohesion.
And what kind of consequences do you see for the rest of us?
I mean, do you see a return to the fear and the... Oh, well, yeah.
At this point... Well, you know, the Russian army is totally enfeebled now.
It's ridiculous.
We couldn't make it to Kiev, right?
But the fact is that Russia still has a vast nuclear arsenal.
And you can be a minor state in Africa.
If you have that kind of nuclear arsenal, you become a world force.
And they have a formidable delivery system on top of it.
Yes, they do.
So I think that we will see another version of a Cold War, quite likely, based on not ideology, not communism versus capitalism, but based on the war of two great states warring for dominance.
This is entirely possible.
In any case, within Europe, Russia is struggling to establish pressure.
But how about those former East Blocs?
I mean, Poland is supposed to be doing okay.
Some of these countries kind of coming into the community.
Yeah.
It'll depend really on how successful these countries are in terms of re-emerging as democratic or socialist democratic states.
And...
You know, you see already in what used to be Yugoslavia that if it doesn't happen, there's all this internal strife that can explode.
Chaos.
Yeah.
So when people, you know, have said to me, now that the Cold War is over, what do thriller writers write about?
Oh, really?
And, you know, Le Carré answered that with The Night Manager.
My next book has to do with terrorism.
Martin Cruz Smith tried it.
Yeah, yeah.
He read it, actually.
I didn't read it.
I'm going to.
He's terrific.
One of Joe Fox.
Yeah, another great Joe Fox.
Well, that's really one of his triumphs, actually.
Yeah, yeah.
You know, Gorky Park was one of his periods.
Right.
Well, Gorky Park's amazing.
But, I'm sorry, what was it?
You were talking about such than a thriller writer.
Oh, yeah, well, yeah, what I'm saying is that
is that the thriller did not emerge from the Cold War.
The thriller was born really in the late 19th century, beginning of the century.
It really had to do with... The spy novel is a subgenre.
Yes.
And that was born probably with the informing, I would say, no?
Or maybe earlier?
I would argue that it was born earlier.
I did a piece, which I could send you if you want, for the TLS about the spy novel, The Fate of the Thriller.
You might be interested in it.
I would, actually.
But...
uh you know it was it was born in really edwardian england and their fear of the germans and their feel fear of infiltration and you know don't forget that uh graham green and eric amber some of the great ones wrote before world war ii yeah so um we just think of this as a spy novel as being a cold war phenomenon and it's just not
Whenever there is a geopolitical threat in the world... What was the Maltese Falcon?
Yeah.
Well, that's a mystery, I suppose.
But whenever there's a geopolitical threat in the world, there will always be a hunger for the international thriller.
And that's why I believe that we're not seeing the end of... We're not seeing a world that's become safe and happy.
We're seeing a world that's more tumultuous.
I'm going to ask you to sign this for me.
What?
You got a nice pen?
I got it, Claire.
Oh, good.
I think we've got a pretty thorough thing here.
Oh, yeah.
We've got a lot.
And I can call you.
Yeah.